---
title: "About"
featured_image: ''
menu:
    nav:
        title: "About"
        weight: 10
---

# AC-Transit

AC Transit (Alameda-Contra Costa Transit District) is an Oakland-based public
transit agency serving the western portions of Alameda and Contra Costa
counties in the East Bay of the San Francisco Bay Area. AC Transit also
operates "Transbay" routes across San Francisco Bay to San Francisco and
selected areas in San Mateo and Santa Clara counties. AC Transit is constituted
as a special district under California law. It is governed by seven elected
members (five from geographic wards and two at large). It is not a part of or
under the control of Alameda or Contra Costa counties or any local
jurisdictions.

## Service area

Buses operate out of four operating divisions: Emeryville, East Oakland
(Seminary), Hayward, and Richmond. The Operations Control Center is in
Emeryville.

The District encompasses the following cities and unincorporated areas:
Oakland, Fremont, Hayward, Berkeley, Richmond, San Leandro, Alameda, Castro
Valley, Newark, San Pablo, El Cerrito, San Lorenzo, Ashland, Albany,
Cherryland, El Sobrante, Piedmont, Fairview, Emeryville, Kensington, and East
Richmond Heights. The District's bus lines also serve parts of some other East
Bay communities, including Milpitas, Pinole, and Union City.

AC Transit serves many colleges and universities including the University of
California, Berkeley; Stanford University; California State University, East
Bay; Chabot College; Holy Names University; Peralta Colleges (Laney College,
College of Alameda, Berkeley City College, and Merritt College), Contra Costa
College; Ohlone College; Northwestern Polytechnic University; and Mills
College.

Most routes connect with regional train service, primarily BART (Bay Area Rapid
Transit), in addition to ACE and Amtrak, including (among other trains) the
Capitol Corridor. AC Transit routes also connect with several other regional
transit services, including Union City Transit, SamTrans, WestCAT, the Santa
Clara Valley Transportation Authority (VTA), San Francisco Municipal Railway
(Muni), Golden Gate Transit, the Alameda-Oakland Ferry, the Harbor Bay Ferry,
Emery Go Round, SolTrans and FAST.

While most AC Transit service consists of local lines throughout the East Bay,
the District also provides many Transbay lines. Most of these run across the
San Francisco-Oakland Bay Bridge to connect communities as distant as El
Sobrante and Newark with San Francisco's Transbay Transit Center. Bus service
is also provided across the San Mateo and Dumbarton bridges to the south.

## Leading the way with 0-emission Fuel Cells

AC Transit is the lead agency of Zero Emission Bay Area (ZEBA), a consortium of
five Bay Area transit agencies (AC Transit, Golden Gate Transit, SFMTA,
SamTrans, and VTA) demonstrating fuel cell buses. The District began the
HyRoad program in 1999 and tested several fuel cell buses with new hydrogen
fuelling infrastructure, including the Ballard/XCELLSiS ZEbus (a New Flyer
F40LF with a Ballard fuel cell) in November 1999. Three hydrogen-powered
buses, based on the Van Hool A330, operated in revenue service
from 2006 to 2010. AC Transit took delivery of 12 additional third-generation
fuel cell buses, based on the Van Hool A300L in 2011. In 2019, AC Transit began
operating 11 additional hydrogen fuel cell buses from New Flyer, one of which
is a 60-foot articulated bus, and 5 battery electric buses from New Flyer.




# People's Transit Alliance

AC Transit is a vital public good for the East Bay's working class. In the
1950s, the working people of the East Bay fought to create the AC Transit
system, taking our bus system out of the hands of a private, for-profit
corporation. AC Transit's riders skew lower-income than those who take other
forms of public transit, and 75% are People of Color. Bus service is essential
to connecting its diverse riders to jobs, schools, healthcare, and grocery
stores - while taking cars off the streets and keeping carbon out of the
atmosphere.

Now, amid a pandemic and economic depression, our public bus system is in grave
danger. Service cuts, layoffs, and a return to rising fares would be
devastating to those who depend on the bus service. AC Transit is a necessity
for the most vulnerable members of the working class - including students, the
elderly, and the disabled. That makes public transit a social justice issue.
That's why we are fighting to defend and expand public transit, to ensure it as
a right for all. We must fight for expanded, fare-free service and a rapid
transition to a zero-emission fleet, funded by taxes on corporations and the
super-rich, to put our transit system at the center of a green economic
recovery.

Our campaign:

* Will fight for safe working conditions for transit workers;

* Will fight to protect Black lives, starting with our workers and riders;

* Will bring the East Bay together to keep AC Transit fare-free and to stop the
  dangerous cuts being proposed to our bus service;

* Will demand that the super-rich and corporations pay their fair share in
  taxes, to save public transportation from austerity and privatization and to
  fund a Green New Deal for public transportation in the East Bay.




